new thinking allowed is presented by the
California Institute for human science a
fully accredited University offering
distant learning graduate degrees that
focus on mind body and spirit the topics
that we cover here we are particularly
excited to announce new degrees
emphasizing parapsychology and the
Paranormal visit their website at cs.edu
[Music]
thinking
aloud conversations on the Leading Edge
of knowledge and Discovery with
psychologist Jeffrey
[Music]
mishlove hello and welcome I'm Emmy
vades co-host with Jeffrey mlov our
topic today is psychedelics and the
cosmic mind with my guest Chris base who
is Professor ameritus in the department
of philosophy and religious studies at
Youngstown State University in Ohio
where he taught for 33 years he is also
adjunct faculty at the California
Institute of integral studies a Meritus
fellow at The Institute of noetic
Sciences and on the advisory Council of
GRA Legacy training Chris is author of
four books life cycles reincarnation in
the the Web of Life dark night early
Dawn the living classroom teaching and
Collective Consciousness and LSD in the
mind of the universe diamonds from
Heaven if you enjoy this program please
like subscribe press the Bell icon and
share Chris is joining us from just
north of Asheville in Weaverville North
Carolina now I'll switch over to the
internet video Welcome it's a great joy
to have you with me on New thinking
aloud today thank you Emy it's a
pleasure to be here today we're going to
discuss your deep exploration of
yourself your own spiritual journey and
into the cosmic mind when you had 73 LSD
sessions between the years of 1979 to
1999 and you outline that in your book
LSD in the mind of the
Universe before we get into all that you
experienced and what you gleaned and
learned from that ex from those
sessions can we just begin with talking
a little bit
about what you've noticed in the last oh
I don't know 10 plus years or more where
it seems that the taboo related to
psychedelic seems to be
Shifting the types of psychedelics there
are out there and and what their uses
are for not each one but sort of overall
why people do this and today we're going
to focus on specifically the cosmic
exploration of them well as you know
there is a a worldwide Renaissance of
research uh taking place in
psychedelics at the Forefront of that
research is the focus on therapeutic
healing that's what's bringing
psychedelics back into the intellectual
and and clinical Community the capacity
of these amplifying substances to bring
forward the personal unconscious and to
unearth the wounds of the personal
unconscious and to assist in deep and
accelerate uh people's healings of
trauma various issues post-traumatic
stress depression things like
this uh a second use of psychedelics
overlapping but different from
therapeutic healing is using pad delics
to promote Spiritual Awakening an
Awakening to our the true nature our
deeper nature underneath our personality
nature to deepen our understanding our
experience of the the wisdom of the
universe the intelligence of the
universe the consciousness of the
universe classic kind of Spiritual
Awakening to the to the nature of
spiritual
reality and that's why I got started in
this work really was to deepen my
Spiritual
Awakening uh but the protocol that I
ended up using was so strong and so
evocative within a few years I was
having experiences that went far beyond
anything that could be understood in
terms of either therapeutic healing or
Spiritual Awakening and I came to
understand over time that the project
that I was involved in was cosmological
exploration that is a systematic attempt
to explore the Deep structure of
spiritual reality or the Deep structure
of the consciousness of the universe
itself so that's really what my work is
about I'm not a
clinician I am a trained as a
philosopher of religion what interested
me from Stan gr's early work was the
capacity of these substances to lay be
not only the personal issues but to
enter into deep communion with the
Consciousness that lies behind existence
mhm can you share give us an overview of
the different types of psychedelics just
to kind of list them off of course
because there are there are many but
we're going to primarily talk about your
experience with LSD today many
psychedelics I mean there uh I guess the
primary ones that come to mind are LSD
psilocybin MDMA though that's probably
that's an empathogen more than a
straight psychedelic uh 5meodmt
um Salvia
divinorum s Pedro I mean I think these
are the types of psychedelics that most
people are familiar with they're all
sorts of derivatives MDMA they're
derivatives off of each of these uh
little tweaks along the way yeah and we
also want to say upfront that you're not
recommending necessarily that people
engage in the same process you engaged
in or advocating necessarily for the use
of these per se is that right
absolutely there are a large percentage
of the population who shouldn't be doing
psychedelics at all these are very
powerful amplifiers of Consciousness
they have tremendous evocative potential
and there are persons who should not be
venturing into these Waters and no one
should be venturing into these Waters
without really good high quality
professional guides accompanying you to
keep you safe as you enter into this
territory now the protocol that I chose
to work with was high doses of LSD I
worked at 500 to 600 micrograms and
looking back at it on it at the end of
it I think what was I
thinking that was ridiculous but I I had
a deep hunger to explore the nature of
existence and working at these high
doses took me on an adventure of a
lifetime but this is very demanding work
which requires a lot of concentration a
lot of safeguards and a lot of time to
assimilate the experiences and I
really knowing what I know now at the
end of this journey I strongly recommend
against using the protocol uh that I
used if I were doing it over again I
would work with lower doses of
psychedelics I'd be much gentler on
myself I'd be willing to sort of Peel
back the layers of the psyche uh much
more gradually than I did in this work
so to begin into your journey what was
the impetus for you to embark on this
deep Exploration with high doses of
LSD well I just finished my graduate
work uh I had just started my academic
career at the time time I was a pretty
convinced atheistically inclined
agnostic uh and then I met the work of
two people Ian Stevenson whose work on
reincarnation convinced me that
reincarnation was a simple fact of life
and the other one was Stannis laav gr
and I read his book Realms of the human
unconscious and I read it in 1978 two
years after it had just come out and as
soon as I read that book I recognized
that Stan were
had tremendous significance not only for
uh psychotherapy but it had tremendous
significance for philosophy of religion
philosophy of
Consciousness and I knew that if I was
ever going to make a contribution in
this field I had to undergo I had to
undergo my own therapeutic exploration
my own regimen so very uncomfortably I
made a decision uh to break the law in a
very I hope disciplined and and
restrained
way and I began a series of uh
psychedelic sessions which ended up much
to my surprise ended up lasting 20 years
I worked for four years I stopped for
six years and then I worked for another
10 years finishing in
1999 and then I spent 20 years after
that digesting these experiences
analyzing them sifting them sorting them
and then wrote LSD in the mind of the
universe in
2019 20 years after I had stopped my
sessions can you give us a sense of what
your sessions were like how you began
you mentioned that you had a sitter
somebody with you in that process how
did you choose to set up your set and
setting well basically I followed the
protocol established by stand reflected
in his book Realms of the human uncon
conscious and then clarified further in
his book LSD Psychotherapy where he lays
out all the nuts and bolts of working uh
in this
modality you're always I was always in a
room separated from the world protected
from the world no
interruptions um by myself with my
sitter who was my wife at the time who's
a clinical psychologist who studied the
Psychedelic literature with
me um
I'm lying down I'm using eye shades and
M and headphones conventional kind of
classic
psychedelic deep introspection deep
meditative orientation very carefully
curated music to support the opening and
the peaking and the UN the closing of a
session so the basic idea is to
profoundly energize the unconscious and
then to create an environment where the
the energies Rising through your
unconscious can be engaged cleanly and
clearly if you stay in contact with the
physical world if you're in dialogue
with friends or if you're going to a
concert that's all fine and good but
that's just not what this work is about
it requires an a powerful amplification
of the unconscious but then creating a
very carefully controlled environment
that laid allows you to engage what
Rises conscientiously and most
importantly to follow whatever arises to
its very bottom level to the bottom line
to let it take you wherever it wants to
take you if I recall correctly it was
typically on Saturdays because you had a
a very important day job teaching at a
university and I think your sessions
lasted about was eight hours each
roughly yeah pretty much I would start
in the early morning and I would finish
by nighttime that night late afternoon
nighttime so a session would last eight
10 hours or so with the carryover tail
but basically a good hard eight hours
each session so it's a major commitment
it's a you have eventually I developed
spiritual protocols that I would adopt
in the weeks leading up to a session and
in the weeks after a session uh and
particularly the day or two before a
session and the day or two after the
session you really have to work with
those uh that time and with the energy
that is dirt in you
because if you're working with very high
doses of a powerful psychedelic like LSD
it it Taps into very deep levels of the
universe and it takes your body and mind
and subtle Energy System a time to
process that
material and so it's it's a major time
commitment and it's just not the day of
it's several days before and several
days after you also took meticulous
notes from your sessions as well which
is a lot of what's in your book yeah
that's the first step of integration is
to act to create an accurate
phenomenological description of exactly
what happens in your sessions because
integration is the foundation of your
future sessions if you don't integrate
sessions thoroughly and
conscientiously then you're not going to
have as likely to have as deep an
experience the next session out so that
there's a circle where you open but then
you integrate what you experience which
lays the foundation for the deeper
opening in your next session yeah it
seems like they built upon each other in
my experience they did um again I I kind
of standardized myself as much as
possible eliminating as many variables I
always was using the same substance the
same dose the same set and setting the
same sitter even in the same part of the
country if you change those variables it
changes the subtlety of the interface
between your mind and the universe's
mind that you're engaging so by trying
to standardize those variables you
create an environment of sustained
communion our dialogue with this deeper
Consciousness and by by creating that
sustained clear contact point my
experience was that the universe or the
Consciousness whatever it was that I was
engaging that Consciousness took me
deeper and deeper in a systematic
fashion it was like um taking a a series
of graduate courses in Consciousness it
was a a tremendous rigorous systematic
the expansion of my frame of reality
yeah why did you choose this path versus
for example sitting in meditation or
some other spiritual path that can lead
you deeper into these
Realms well I had been meditating since
College um I'm was familiar with
meditation i' meditated in a couple of
different Traditions by that time and
I'm a professor of religious studies so
I had a good solid grounding in the
world's spiritual traditions
I taught courses in psychology of
religion and transpersonal studies and
comparative mysticism so I understood
the world of of meditation and
contemplative
practice I started by re thinking that
these sessions would basically help me
break through some of the obstacles that
had risen in my contemplative
practice what I found however was that
this was a protocol of spiritual
exploration
that took me deeper than I had ever
imagined being possible when I began
this work and once I was into it couple
of years uh I had developed an aptitude
for working in these states and I never
stopped meditating I was always
meditating through this time I was
always doing yoga and various spiritual
practices in fact I think that the
deeper you want to go in working with
psychedelics the more important it is to
have a daily spiritual practice that
helps anchor you and helps you absorb
the experiences that you unleash with
psychedelics it was a different protocol
it gave me access to States Of
Consciousness that you can reach with
meditation but only with lifetimes not
just one lifetime but many lifetimes of
meditation so I differentiate between
what I call the path of temporary
immersion which is working with
psychedelics as you only you're only
immersed in these states for hours at a
time versus the path of uh presence of
contemplative presence where it's a
slower path but it tends to produce
states of abiding
transparency whereas the temporary path
pushes you deep
into these conscious domains and then it
wears off and you come back there
they're
complimenting approaches but they are
different let's begin with your very
first session just to get us started
because I know you've done many of them
to give the listeners the audience the
viewers a taste of what your experience
was like that led you to keep wanting to
come back for
more probably the most significant thing
that happened in my first session was
that I entered a phase of the work where
I could not remember who I was I could
not remember what I was what I did for a
living living I could not remember
whether I was a man or a woman even it
was a complete uh Interruption of my
stream of Consciousness that was telling
me who and what I was and this was a
frightening experience a jarring
experience but in the end I learned that
it was a very helpful experience because
it showed me that
it would be pointless for me to try to
stay in control because if you can't
control your self- knowledge then what
that's about as basic as you can get and
this session taught me that in this work
you have to surrender radically to
whatever arises and and it saved me a
lot of time and energy later when more
demanding experiences opened there's a
tendency to sort of want to maintain
control to hold on to reality as you
know it and in this type of work you
have to let go of reality as you know it
you have to completely surrender and go
where it wants to take you and so that
was just the first lesson that basically
said don't waste time trying to maintain
control before we go further into some
of your sessions and giving us a taste
of your experiences and what you learned
have you come to understand the
physiology of what LSD is doing on the
human physiology the nervous system of
course a lot of people think about
connect Consciousness with the brain
which of course it's more than that
however I recently spoke with Jill bolty
Taylor who was a neuroanatomist from
Harvard and she had a wrote a well-known
book her stroke of insight where she had
a stroke and yeah she had an 8-year
journey of recovery back but she
described that our personal sense of
identity is just the size of a peanut in
our brains
yeah yeah and you know I follow the
discussion of the science scientist
about how whether this biochemistry of
of of LSD and how it affects brain
structure and default mode Network
Interruption and those type of
discussions but I'm not really drawn to
that conversation I'm not primarily a
scient scientist in training I basically
have taken more of a psychological
approach to understanding that these
substances whatever their mechanism they
amplify Consciousness they open they hyp
sensitize Consciousness and they allow
you to experience dimensions of your
mind and eventually of reality beyond
your
mind which usually were kept in a
space-time kind of focus where we don't
experience these subtler textures right
where we can feel trapped inside our
bodies or in the what most people
consider is primarily the materialistic
World which we know is there's much more
than that which is what we're talking
about today yeah yeah and that's that's
the real draw to me and so I I basically
work within the frame of reference that
I had acquired from Stan gr and some of
the other earlier researchers using a
description of the dynamic qualities of
psychedelic Consciousness or the
Consciousness that arises with
psychedelics and I'll let the science
guys sort out the physiology of it I
know that that's interesting and I find
that often the the physiological
discussion is carried out
within reductive metaphysical
assumptions which really is not helping
our conversation right now mhm you mean
the conversation in general we're having
a good conversation right I mean the
attempts to sort of understand to
correlate what's happening in the brain
physiologically right with the states of
Consciousness that one is
experiencing but often these discussions
take place within a certain set of
metaphysical assumptions and too often
those metaphysical assumptions tend to
be reductive they tend to sort of lean
in the direction of thinking that
physical reality is the dominant and
determining reality of one's
experience but when you actually look at
the experiences that emerge in
psychedelics that restrictive
metaphysical framework is
shattered yeah well I just want to touch
on it for now and primarily because
there may be those listening thinking
well this is just you know your brain on
on drugs and it's causing you know the
whole chemical reaction yeah that's been
discussed with near-death experiencers
and so forth but research has shown that
there's more going on with that so I
definitely understand what you're what
you're saying and we can get into the
veracity or the trusting of these
experiences a little later in our
conversation yeah can you take us more
into some of your experiences with your
sessions with LSD to give us a taste of
what that was like for
you that's a hard question I mean let's
give a context some very influen uential
books were written based on a very
limited number of psychedelic
experiences so Aldis Huxley wrote his
very important beautiful book The Doors
opening the doors of perception after
only one masculine experience and
Houston Smith wrote his book a his
collected Reflections on
psychedelics cleansing the doors of
perception after only taking LSD six
times over the course of his lifetime
Michael PA wrote his book after which is
a very important very helpful book but
after only a handful of psychedelic
experiences so the challenge that anyone
faces coming into my work are the
challenges that I have conveying my
experiences is just how long the journey
was how many layers of Consciousness
opened in that Journey it's not simply a
matter of opening 73 times to the same
interface is that there is a cycle of
death and rebirth that reproduces
itself so that death breaks you free of
one level of reality physical reality in
the beginning and enters takes you into
a nonphysical spiritual reality and you
work there for a while but if you work
consistently eventually you'll go
through another death and rebirth that
will take you into another level of
reality where you have to learn the
whole rules of that level of reality
which would then will be followed taking
you into another level so the problem I
have with answering your question
is so many levels of
reality any if I focused on any one I'd
be leaving out so many others so let me
just say this in the
beginning when I was looking over the
whole of my sessions and putting them
together in order to write this
storyline of what happened on those
sessions I eventually differentiated or
distinguished five different broad
categories that my sessions fell
into first having to do with personal
mind your personal unconscious your
personal
story second Collective mind which has
to do with the collective psyche the
psyche of humanity the species mind the
third archetypal mind which in my case
I'm primarily addressing
not archetypes in the yian sense but
archetypes more in the platonic sense
levels dimensions of reality which lie
outside time and space and outside uh
the collective
psyche causal levels of reality
are the level of Oneness the level where
Oneness becomes the dominant
reality and then beyond that diamond
Luminosity a particularly clear
dimension of light that I encountered
and worked with in the last five years
of my work so all of my experiences I
can kind of lay them out as a sequential
Journey starting at the level of
personal mind moving into the level of
collective mind archetypal mind so on
and so forth well I would love to
discuss each of those levels you went
into what I recall reading in your book
that seemed to be common themes of your
sessions were that it was you said
earlier a letting go and that there was
it seemed a lot of uh pain and suffering
to actually reach to these deeper levels
of consciousness can you share what that
was like for you in the early stage and
when I was working at the level of
personal mind that the pain and
suffering came in the form of what Stan
gr has very well discussed and presented
in his discussion of the perod level of
Consciousness
basically sometimes reliving your birth
but confronting the fundamental
existential questions that dominate uh
life and physical
reality is there any meaning in the
universe is there any order any design
to it any intelligence of it because at
just the physical level everything we
love everything we know will be
destroyed at death is there any reality
Beyond Death I mean that's and therefore
you you have to face the deepest levels
of metaphysical angst in order to move
through this until eventually your
identity is just crushed and shattered
that's easier for some people to undergo
than it is for other people but you you
have to surrender your time space
identity in order to gain access to the
next level of reality at that next level
of reality I continue to have a a
deepening
confrontation with pain suffering and
violence it was so deep and it left
lasted so long and it it seemed to
Encompass so many hundreds of thousands
of persons and so many thousands of
years that I eventually came to the
decision that this was not some didn't
represent a a deepening or cleansing or
healing of my personal psyche that what
was being healed here was some aspect of
the collective psyche of humanity itself
that something was using my
sessions in order to set in motion a
Reconciliation and a healing of levels
of pain that were fundamentally
Collective not
personal and then more levels of death
and rebirth where the the the nature of
death and suffering changes the deeper
you go but the basic principle is is
pretty simple if you want to experience
Oneness with God or if you want to
experience a deep experience of the the
nature of the mind of the
universe the problem is our historical
consciousness is just too small if you
want to literally experience it I mean
it's one thing to think about it but to
actually immerse yourself in the
communion with these levels of reality
your small identity has to be
surrendered and you have to flow be
willing to flow into a larger level of
identity So eventually you're going into
Lev of reality where it would be a
misrepresentation to think that Chris
bash went and had those experiences
rather Cris Bas has to be destroyed
dissolved in order
for these levels of consciousness to
manifest inside Chris B's awareness but
the fact that I remember those
experiences doesn't mean that my
personality identity was present when
those experiences were being had it's
kind of like you have to Lose Yourself
enter into communion with the universe
and then when you come back you gather
your experiences back and then my
personality synthesizes them digests
them trying to integrate them but it's
it's a it's a pulsing you learn to sort
of surrender completely open breathe
deeply you receive teachings then you
bring it all back in and then you try to
integrate it and consolidate it what are
some of the teachings you received that
the universe is a
manifestation of a single Consciousness
a massive
Consciousness beyond anything that we've
ever begun to grasp in our Western
religious and philosophical
traditions that it is an intent that
creation is an intentional act it is an
act
of I hate to use the word design because
the those theories are problematic but
that there is a an intelligence
manifesting itself in time and space
that we are part of this intelligence
that our nature is of the same nature as
its nature so this is an ancient idea
Atman is Brahman the essence of the
individual is the essence of the
totality that reincarnation is simply a
fact of life I don't think we get
anywhere in trying to understand
existence unless un we understand the
pulse of Life unless we understand that
our current life is just the most recent
in many many repeating cycles of life
and death that there is an underlying
logic to the circumstances within which
we find ourselves the H the Buddhists
and the Hindus talk about Karma that
there is a deeper
intentionality working itself out in the
circumstances of our of our existence
and that and that our evolutionary
existence is not simply driven by blind
chance and and mechanical processes
which
are which are purely mechanical but that
there is a deeper
intelligence manifesting itself in the
circumstances of our life in the
challenges that we are
facing and inviting us to become more by
the end of our life than we were in the
beginning so just a a few touch points
yeah yeah going back to your experiences
in these
sessions it seems that death and rebirth
and a purification process happened in
many if not all of your sessions yeah
what did you come to understand was the
reason for that first the general
structure of the sessions as I experienc
them is that every session there's a
sort of a rhythm of a cycle with
variations but basically the first early
hours of a session are spent in some
type of deep purification process deep
confrontation
um and then if you surrender to that
process and let it take you it reaches a
culmination point there is a surrender a
death rebirth process in which you are
then spun into transpersonal ecstatic
places for the remainder of the session
and then that runs its course and then
the next session however many months
between and I was doing about five
sessions a year on average M starts you
right back into the purification part
carrying you then forward into the
ecstatic portion so the purpose of the
purification and the purpose of the
death is simply cleaning just cleaning
cleaning cleaning cleaning
um when you eventually come to have deep
experience of the fundamental identity
of your nature and the divine
nature or the infinite nature that you
are the infinite then it gives you a
different perspective on what it is that
was present preventing you all those
years from realizing that what was
keeping you from it and it's it's this
tight conditioning of the psyche it's
it's it's the type conditioning which is
associated with your time space con ious
MH and that has to be softened it has to
be released it has to be let go in order
to move into these expansive places so
the the death rebirth cycle is actually
a purification cycle in fact I learned
that death is actually an intense stage
of purification once you've died many
times you learn that truly it's
impossible to die you know what you you
are can die the structure of your life
can die reality as you have known it can
die but the Phoenix always Rises the
essence of the person always emerges in
a different reality with new potentials
with new capacities but it's impossible
to die and the reason we can't die is I
think because our nature is the nature
of the Divine so the form can die but
the essence cannot die once you know
that then
I began to understand that the
experience of death which kept coming up
in my sessions was actually an
experience an advanced experience of
purification when purification reaches a
critical portion
position so that it begins to dissolve
the fundamental structures of what you
had known as real then you have reached
the death point the death and rebirth
point and death has come back to Grace
you again so from my
perspective experiencing death in a
psychedelic session or to experience
horrendous suffering or pain is actually
a a it's an exciting stage in the work
it's not something to be avoided a lot
of people worry about oh I don't want to
have a bad session we got to do
everything we can to avoid having a bad
session but I think that's a radical
misunderstanding of the depth of
Consciousness and the power that this
technique gives
you in my experience
you come you begin to understand that
the deeper the purification the deeper
the ecstatic immersion so that you begin
to welcome the purification you begin to
welcome the challenges that you face you
begin to welcome the bad sessions in
order to actualize a higher more
intimate experience with the Divine
Consciousness now that's assuming that
you're working in a completely
controlled environment you have done all
the homework you've done your
preparation you can have a bad session
for a lot
of bad reasons you can be in the wrong
place the wrong time not preparing
yourself wrong set and
setting those can give you bad sessions
which are not of the quality that I'm
talking
about yeah I will share that when I was
in high school a group of friends wanted
to do LSD or acid as it was called as
well and and I did not partake however I
was the sitter and my role was to make
sure that everybody did have a good
experience which actually the few times
that that happened was always the case
but I know you mentioned that a bad trip
is not necessarily a bad trip yeah so
you suggest that that's part of the
process but one needs to be have done
the preparation ahead of time to know
what they're getting
into yeah I mean psychadelics amplify
Consciousness and and most people will
take a
PS I don't want to overgeneralize some
people take a psychedelic and what
they're looking for is a good
afternoon a little more openness to the
life of the universe little more
openness to the to the love that's in
the universe and they they maintain
their the fundamental parameters of
their personality get softer and
expansive and let some of these
experiences in which is perfectly fine
but if you if you want to go into a deep
dive if you want to explore the Deep
structure of existence if you want to
transcend space transcend time move into
the deep
future that requires a more uh carefully
laid out strategy in working with these
states so I'm not suggesting that the
way I work with these states is the only
way beneficial way to work with these
states is
simply for me as a philosopher I was
looking for depth of immersion depth of
understanding and that takes some
serious um some serious
work so while we're on the topic of this
death and rebirth surrendering
purification can you share with us what
is it that dies and reborn I know you
outline in your book a few different
areas that you've come to understand
stand yeah well
basically this became a real
intellectual issue for me I mean when
you experience dying and being reborn
through multiple levels of reality it
then becomes a question what is it
that's actually dying you may have deep
and profound experiences of Dying Years
After you've gone through ego death and
it's not simply the ego dying over and
over and over again it's it's a
different kind of death so at the at the
appendix in LSD in the mind of the
Universe I have an appendix on what dies
and is reborn and I suggest four levels
of maybe beginning to address that
question one of them is what dies is our
personal
ego second is what dies is some aspect
of the collective ego of the collective
psyche third what dies is what I call
the shamanic person
complicated concept but when you've been
on the journey for a long time when you
move into psychedelic space you resume
your psychedelic Persona you resume your
shamanic persona it's
like as a friend of mine said you walk
with the old ones once
again you've kind of let you've made the
transition often enough that you your
and your shamanic Persona is the living
integration of all of your psychedelic
experiences up to that point in time so
let's say in this case of 20 sessions in
working at the level of the collective
psyche into what I call the ocean of
suffering you stabilize a psychedelic
identity uh a shamanic Persona that
integrates all the experiences that you
have had of transpersonal states of
Consciousness beyond your physical
Consciousness if you are going to go
into yet a still deeper level of
Consciousness Beyond where you had lived
before then that shamanic Persona has to
die it has to surrender in order for a
new category set of category of
experiences to emerge and for a still
deeper shamanic Persona to emerge and so
I think in some Advanced sessions what
is dying is the previous identity that
or the identity which we had developed
from sustained psychedelic experiences
over many
years so that's I think the third thing
is I would suggest it's what I call the
shamanic Persona or the shamanic self is
dying it's not the egoic self it's your
psychedelic self which is dying and then
at a more subtle level I think what is
dying is actually some dimension of
Consciousness itself and this this gets
harder to discuss because it requires a
more subtle uh level of understanding
but basically sometimes in my late work
when I was working at at very deep
levels of consciousness when I was
working in deep levels of divine
communion I had the experience
that the Divine level that I was
experiencing came itself into a
crescendo
which opened up a higher level of divine
communion than had been actualized up to
this point in time Shri arendo says when
he's talking in his metaphysical system
he says looking down the Divine sees all
the levels of reality that it's
manifested but it's a one-way mirror so
the Divine looking down sees everything
but we who are the Divine looking up
tend to see only the level that we are
at so it's a one-way
mirror and that means even at deep deep
levels should we say there are aspects
of divine
Consciousness which cannot see or
experience de into still deeper levels
of divine
Consciousness and
somehow when we do this work we actually
can facilitate a communion which takes
place between two different levels of
divine Consciousness far beyond space
time far beyond personal reality and
there is a celebratory joy that takes
place when the Divine wakes up to a
still deeper level of the Divine there
is a communion that takes place there is
a joyful celebration when the higher is
able to infuse itself more deeply into
the lower and so I think that one of the
things one way of thinking about what
dies in very Advanced stages is uh some
aspect of divine Consciousness
itself and yet according to your
experiences that death then precipitates
a a rebirth typically did you discover
that with Consciousness itself as well
yes or the Divine itself yeah I mean
it's again we're we're it's it's
complicated because we're rushing into
an area Where Angels Fear To
Tread right we're trying to put language
to an experience that
many sometimes for example with
near-death experiencers they'll say it's
ineffable so I understand there's a a
language
barrier well there is a language barrier
but I for me the biggest issue is not
the language barrier it it is to lay the
foundation to lay the prerequisites to
put things in place so that you people
can understand the language that you
were want to use to describe these
phenomena and it's not ordinary
language it's not everyday experience it
requires kind of a a conceptual reframe
a conceptual understanding so that you
can describe certain things that lie far
beyond our ordinary sensate experience
but in some ways it's not that different
from what uh a near-death episode person
experiences in fact I find I feel the
greatest correspondence and and and
collegiality with people who had deep
near-death episode experiences Because
deep
ndes are the experiences are the closest
correlate to my experience with deep
psychedelic work I think if you work
with psychedelics in a focused way over
long periods of time you can access the
same dimensions of Consciousness that
someone accesses with it an nde a
near-death experience the difference is
that where for most people the nde
experiences this only once in their life
with sustained psychedelics you can go
back multiple times into this territory
and because you can go back multiple
times you're taught there are more
nuances that are brought out in terms of
how this all works in the in playay of
Consciousness can you help expand the
conceptual framework for us a little bit
about what that experience has been like
for you
let me narrow it into one particular
just to take one
example when I was in the work now I
guess four five years into the work and
I began to get systematic access to
archetypal reality and I began to have
experiences every time I went into my
session I entered a level of reality
that I knew was more real than space
time it was the primary reality space
time was the secondary
reality I had encounters with vast
beings that I I could not comprehend I
could not wrap my mind around them but I
knew that these were the beings who are
responsible for creating space time and
creating fundamental conditions within
SpaceTime but to have access to these
realities everything that I had known
about human history about human thought
everything about the history of humanity
had had to fall away because the entire
Collective psyche had to Fall Away in
order to enter
into levels of consciousness that
Humanity as a whole has not had access
to or has not experienced very few
number of people have access to these
deep dimensions of
reality but even in archetypal reality
you're dealing with very profound
levels of consciousness but there is
still dualism there there is still a
sense of self and other archetype and
self different archetypes so it's there
is a dualistic quality to
it when I went beyond archetype of
reality into causal reality that's the
signature of causal reality that all
dualisms
dissolve so that you begin to experience
the world
in whatever aspect you're experiencing
it you're experiencing the world as a
unified single entity a single
Consciousness I think it was platinus
who says the world breathes as one and
that's the experience there that there
is a radical transparency that opens
where you are fundamentally encountering
the wholeness of
life that doesn't negate differentiation
in fact it affirms
differentiation but that differentiation
is experienced as different
manifestations of this single integrated
whole undivided reality that we call God
or we call the Divine or the one that's
a different category of experience
altogether uh from archetypal reality
can you share a little bit more about
why it's termed
archetypal reality or that layer for
those who maybe aren't familiar with
archetypes sure I use the term
archetype in sort of two senses here uh
one is Yung talked about archetypes as
the you know the the primary themes the
repetitive themes of human experience
that become concretized in forms old man
old woman trickster jokester you know
those Clacks of
Shadow and then so I I think of them as
kind of archetypal in the sense of the
primary the dominant themes of the the
collective psyche I see the second way
in which archetypes is used is in the
platonic tradition where Plato talks
about the discovery of a level of
reality that lies Beyond Time space
altogether and I experienced both I
experience Plato's sense of archetypes I
experienc that reality but not in the
way that Plato describes it Plato thinks
of archetypes as
Eternal principles within an eternal
being so they are the unchanging
prototypes that are used in creation and
they exist within the mind of an
unchanging Divine unchanging infinite
being that's not how I experience those
archetypes I experience them as living
entities but living on a vast scale uh
of time and space far beyond anything
that we know inside time and space but
what is shared is that for something to
manifest inside time and space it comes
out of the Oneness through these
fundamental intermediate structures
which are very
profound super intelligent super
powerful
structures and then focusing this energy
down into concretizing it concretizing
it into eventually manifesting
in space-time reality as we know it m
when I experien the collective psyche
and I experience a lower level of
archetypes in yung's sense of
archetypes it it was similar to yung's
sense in that there were these
archetypal themes within Humanity but I
did not experience what Yung experienced
as archetypes I didn't have the
experience of wisal man wisal woman
things like this it's not that I don't
think those exist but what I experienced
was Humanity as a single organism over
and over and over again as a single
organism and that there were metam
meridians within Humanity that wo all of
our individual lives into the life of
the human species as a whole so I
learned that our minds are woven into
the collective mind they are aspects
they are seed crystals within the
collective mind even our bodies and the
diseases that we have to manage are all
part of the body of humanity evolving
itself over long periods of time so it
was archetypal in the sense of trans
individual motifs within the human
psyche but it wasn't the way quite the
way Yung conceptualized it so basically
archetypes in this way reflect the
Insight that there are dominant
structures that are suprapersonal
they're they go beyond the functioning
of individual
beings and then in platonic sense there
are metaphysical archetypes that
basically
inform um the manifestation of time and
space
itself so at the causal level you
mentioned this is where you connect with
the Divine intelligence or what we
perceive as is God I imagine those there
may be people listening wondering did
you discover that there is a
God I generally tend not to like to use
God language though I
do the reason I don't like to use God
language is because as someone who knows
the history of world religions pretty
well I also know all the theologies that
have gone into God language and all the
cultural limitations that go into it and
all the abuse that went into it and all
the the crimes and the the horrible
things that have been done in the name
of God and certainly I'm not talking
about God in anything like that and so I
would use the word the Divine instead of
God but that's really that's just an
inrun because even the concept of the
Divine carries into it certain
carryovers from our time space
experience and so on the one hand I want
to affirm the idea that there is this
profound generative
intelligence
manifesting as time and space that time
and space is not something which is
independent of the Divine but it is in
classic Hindu thinking it is the
manifestation of the body of the Divine
so in that way I want to affirm a very
wide vision of the Divine of God
but because I've gone so deeply into the
future and so deeply beyond space and
time so many times my understanding or
my feeling for this Cosmic
principle I can't fit it inside the
theologies of the religions of the world
it's just it's much larger than that and
so I so on the one hand okay I can call
call it God but then I have to qualify
that it's not this it's not that it's
not what you mean by God here it's not
what you mean by God there right like a
lot of people think of at least in
the monotheistic Traditions think of it
as a individual or a being that we're
made in the form of right yeah and
that's what I think people are maybe
curious about is what you discovered as
far as you know did you connect with a
being or being
or Angels or other Divine entities and
and if you could share a little bit
about what that realm was like in all
the years when I was doing this work and
all the work I
did I never encountered a being a Divine
being that I'm God you know this is what
I am it wasn't like that it was
like I would go deeper into a level of
Consciousness and I would experience a
communion with this Consciousness and
this Consciousness would teach me it
knew me it would teach me and show me
things and it would crush me and then
bring me forward into still deeper
levels and I would go into those deeper
levels and I would enter into communion
with those levels and and I internalized
the energy of those levels and I was
with this
Consciousness but it never crystallized
into a specific form I always felt its
presence it guided my sessions I could
enter into dialogue with it I could
enter into communion with it it would it
would dissolve me into
itself but it never crystallized into a
what you might call a personality of God
or a person of God and it just kept
getting larger and larger deeper and
deeper more and more vast and I think
that many of our theologies of God or
our thinking about God is really based
upon uh what I would call the early
encounters with an infinite intelligence
that that this infinite intelligence is
far larger far too large to ever be
concretized in the historical lineages
that we recognize in the world
Traditions it's it's infinite in itself
in fact when I was in the deepest level
of Consciousness that I ever went into
when I was in the diamond Luminosity
work and that's the work that occupied
me for the last five years when I was as
deep into the diamond Luminosity as I
had ever entered and I was Far Beyond
Time space reality I was dissolved into
the Luminous you might say the body of
the Divine MH all of a sudden my visual
field turned 90 degrees a window opened
up and I saw reality far far in the
distance and I saw a light in that
reality and a beam of light came out of
that reality and hit me and I was in the
diam Luminosity condition but this light
was so powerful it shattered my mind and
it took me minutes to recover from this
and that's when I began to realize it's
an infinite progression the Divine is
truly an infinite reality even using
this powerful method I would never get
to the end
of this reality and that's one of the
reasons why I would be much gentler with
myself if I were doing this again today
because I discovered see when I began
this work I thought that the purpose was
to reach a state of consciousness to
reach Enlightenment or to reach Oneness
with God or to dissolve into the Primal
void and I had known Oneness with God at
many different levels and I had entered
into the Primal void several times and I
had learned that there are different
depths of of the Primal
void and so now I began to understand
that it's not about getting to some end
state which is going to magically
transform your life it's a matter of
opening up and letting the love and
intelligence of the universe or the
Divine into you as much as you can bring
it in as much as you can hold on to it
as much as you can distill into your the
fabric of your living existence your
Earthly
existence it's not about getting to some
end point it's about deepening the
ongoing
communion that exists between ourselves
inside time and space and this larger
spiritual
reality very
beautiful can you share more with us
about the diamond
Luminosity light surfaces many times in
our psychedelic work I mean every time
you go through a death rebirth
experience all very typically people
encounter the light many forms of of
light and I had encountered this light
at many different levels along the
journey after I'd gone through ego death
after I'd gone through the ocean of
suffering work after I'd gone through
archetypal reality after I'd gone into
the Cal of reality about 15 years into
my work when I had been given so many
spiritual Treasures I felt compl
completely existentially satisfied I
mean I just I had been to to experience
radical shunyata emptiness of self
Oneness of all existence had been
offered so many
treasures and then I went through yet
another cycle of death and
rebirth and I accessed a level of light
a dimension of light that was so pure
and so clear here it absolutely stunned
me and it became my sole objective in
the rest of my psychedelic work to
return to this reality because once you
touch what I'm calling the diamond
Luminosity once you touch it it's a
reality which is so far beyond anything
that I had ever touched in any of my
earlier work that I just lost interest
in archetypal reality I lost interest in
caal reality I wanted to get back into
this level of reality it's so pure it's
just breathtakingly
magnificently pure and the levels of
ecstasy associated with it are just
staggering and in the next five years of
work in 26 sessions which is onethird of
my entire journey I only got access to
this level of reality four more four
times so in between those four sessions
were lots of purification more
purification at very deep level more
learning more teaching but accessing
this reality four times and I think as I
look at the the world's literature the
spiritual literature and Buddhist
literature is probably the tradition
that I know the best they call this
level of reality
dharmakaya the clear light of absolute
abolute reality so it is considered in
their
tradition the the absolute foundational
reality of of of time and space all time
and space reality all the galaxies all
the big bang emerge out of this
crystallin light which is a pre samsaric
it's what we would call an extra
samsaric reality it's outside of the
cycle of of space and time so it's
outside of physical reality and it's
also outside of the bardos of postmortem
existence it's outside of the entire
system once you touch it you just you're
hopelessly in love with it for the rest
of your life it just is something that
illumines everything I understood what
the Buddhist meant when they said touch
it
once it can undo hundreds of years of
living in the shadows of karma because
it's such it has such a penetrating
transformative effect impact that just
to touch
it it changes your whole understanding
of existence and your whole experience
of what it means to be
alive is this also what you referred to
in your book as the
Beloved well you know everybody has to
find a word to describe this
Transcendent reality you know we can
talk about God or we talk about the
Divine uh some people call it the
absolute dosm calls it the Eternal Dao
uh Jewish mysticism calls it the Ein so
the great nothingness the great
emptiness I call it my beloved uh
because when you in a path of temporary
immersion you move into intimacy with
this reality and then you come back out
of it and then you move into intimacy
and you come back out of it
and it it becomes like a love
relationship but it's a love
relationship which actually dissolves
the bodies of the two different beings
the communion that arises is it's a deep
and profound spiritual communion and so
I just adopted the vocabulary that felt
most natural to me and I called it my
beloved the
Beloved and so yes to me the Beloved
manifests itself at all sorts of
different levels it's it's manifest ing
itself at the early level early stages
the middle stages and the advanced
stages but in the end you recognize that
you're always in dialogue with this
profound creative intelligence which
interestingly enough feels more like a
she in my experience than a he and and I
I associate the
feminine side of God with the act of
creation and what you might think of as
the masculine side of God and as the
radically
Transcendent aspect of God the basic
idea is that the Primal one divides into
two one stays outside of space time the
other manifests space and time and
manifest all life within space and time
so for me the
Beloved is more the feminine side of the
Divine the Divine mother yes it seems
that light is a theme in your
experiences and also how much of a role
did or does Love play in these
experiences for
you it it played eventually a very large
role um there were some
sessions in which
I encountered or was blessed with
experiences of cosmic love I mean and
it's just it's love not like anything
I'd ever experienced before I mean it's
just absolutely shatters me and
overwhelmed me I experiened that all of
existence was generated not out of
Simply a sheer power I mean can you
think the power of the big bang and
everything that emerged from it not only
the
intelligence there but that love a a
profound Cosmic Love Lies at the very
Act of Creation
itself and that's obviously a kind of
love that's not like any anything that
we know in human parlament it's it's not
anything nearly that small but it is the
it is the fiber of the
Divine of the Divine itself and I think
it's you can think of it as love and
Oneness are kind of two different sides
of the reality
because love if the world is truly one
if it's all one love is the emotion of
this Oneness love is the the fact of
Oneness asserting itself in a world of
Duality yeah love has been really
important which it really surprised me
because you know of the four yogas in uh
Hinduism Yana the path of the Mind Raja
the path of meditation Karma Yoga bakti
Yoga bakti Yoga The Yoga of loving
devotion it's a form of yoga that I
identified with the least I've always
been more intellectually oriented medit
atively oriented not baky oriented and
yet I began to have a series of very
profound
Baki experiences
that it's kind of what led me to talk
about the Beloved In This Very lover
kind of
context how much is love the fabric of
the Divine anything I say at this point
I mean first first of all please forgive
my H hubris at daring to describe the
nature of the Divine I mean come on get
real I mean this is just
like so anything I say is going to be
totally
inadequate to the reality itself so we
could describe the divine nature as
infinite
knowledge infinite power an infinite
love and and all of those are equally
true and I'm sure that there are other
qualities which we would want to add to
that but let's start with those three
um The Challenge I think of of
understanding the love aspect of the
Divine is because life as we experience
it is an often dirty nasty mean cruel
thing and so any suggestion that somehow
the World As We Know It with all of its
pain and suffering is somehow a
manifestation of a supremely loving
Consciousness is just it's horrendously
difficult to reconcile those and and I
understand that I mean as a as a
philosopher of religion I I understand
the
challenge and I think the only way of
overcoming that challenge is to really
understand the Deep structure or the
Deep intentionality that's manifesting
itself in the creation itself in the our
evolving Universe in the project of the
universe you have to radically expand
your time Horizon to understand what's
taking place here you have to understand
that the human condition as we currently
know it is just a small dot in a long
developmental process that not only has
been going on for 13.7 billion years but
will continue to go on for 13.7 plus
more years so that as Shri arendo said
we are a transitional species we are
actualizing ourself within a long
developmental
trajectory and if we think that uh well
God must not be real because uh we could
have done a we could have done a better
job creating Universe if I had infinite
power I could have
certainly created a better Universe than
this where children die and and all the
terrible things that happen to us but
that assumes that we we know what the
Divine intention is what the project of
existence is and I think we are like
children in a in a play pen we are just
beginning to get a grip on the enormity
of the project of existence we're just
beginning really since Hubble in modern
theories of cosmology beginning to
understand the size and depth and
textures I think psychedelics are kind
of like the Hubble of psychological
insight they are giving us a experience
of the
depth in which Consciousness exists but
that just gets us at the beginning of
beginning to comprehend what is the
project what will Humanity be five
billion years from now what will we be a
million years from now or even a 100,000
years from
now the Divine seems to think on on that
scale we have to radically stretch
ourselves to think on that
scale so the problem of suffering really
challenges our understanding of the role
of love the the the principle of love in
the divine
nature but once we have an
experience an experiential access to
some of the deeper
trajectories of the Divine
intent then things begin to make more
sense I think the Divine is creating a
masterpiece I mean I think refined
elevated potentiated Human Experience is
a masterpiece of creation that takes
thousands thousands millions of years
millions of years to to orchestrate and
to bring forward especially since it's
it's not done we're
not we intentionally cooperate and
participate in this creative process
it's not being done to us it's something
we are carrying forward in the very
fiber of our
being but we we really have to kind of
grasp the scale of
things to even understand our present
circumstances at the same time it sounds
like you found found that the Atman is
Brahman that you found that we are part
of the Divine and the Divine is part of
us
yeah yeah and and that there's in
really there's very little that's new in
any of the experiences that I lay out I
mean the the vision of reality the
cosmology that emerges out of
psychedelic work is fundamentally the
same as the cosmology that emerges out
of deep mystical spiritual traditions in
the very highest and most refined levels
of spiritual traditions in the world
it's not that we're bringing something
new to the table maybe a little bit but
we're not bringing a whole lot of new to
the table what we have is a different
protocol a different strategy for
accessing these very deep levels of
reality which yield deep insights into
the structure of existence but you will
find the same fundamental cosmology
emerging out of the the great spiritual
traditions of the
world since you brought up the Hubble
telescope and we've primarily been
talking about what we consider it's just
another word as
Consciousness what did you discover in
our universe what we consider sort of
the the physical Universe what we
consider as space or outer space did you
Traverse that aspect of experience in
your
sessions I wasn't taken
into Journeys into our galaxy or
Journeys into other
galaxies that just wasn't part of the
the work for me other people may have
those experien or have had those
experiences so while I was given there's
a a particular session called The Cosmic
tour called it the cosmic tour I was
taken on this Cosmic tour and shown so
many
things much of which I could not re
reproduce when I came back into my time
space Consciousness because my time
space Consciousness just did not have
the vocabulary the the intellectual
tools to articulate those that's why
I've often wished that I had a PhD in
physics and
astrophysics that I would better be able
to articulate some of the experiences
that I was given but I didn't spend a
lot of a time traveling within time and
space it was more a matter of going
underneath time and space and getting
into the underlying deep structure that
that informs time and
space and our experience in time and
space I feel like I
recall in your book that you were shown
that that like the Universe I think
you've kind of already said this like
goes on and on essentially is that right
do I recall that
correctly yeah I mean basically it it
there are two different models of the
universe one is that it'll keep
expanding forever and and the other is
that we reach a point where there's a
maximum expansion expansion and then it
begins a contraction so is it a
pulsating universe expanding and
Contracting and then re-expanding or is
it an infinitely expanding Universe I I
don't really have uh an answer to those
to that particular question but clearly
the universe is just it's on a tear yeah
on a tear it's going on for billions and
billions and billions of years yeah now
that's a deflating Insight if you think
that a human being is simply a hundredy
old being if we're simply a 100 year old
being then we're basically sand on the
beach of the beside the ocean we don't
really get to participate in that deep
future but if reincarnation is true and
I think there's plenty of factual
evidence that it's true if reincarnation
is true and if it's true that our
Essence is
indestructible and that we take
everything that we've learned and roll
it over into continued learning over
thousands and thousands and millions of
years then we get to actually
participate in this Divine unfolding
it's not somebody else's future or some
other future but it's our future we are
you know we are co-participants Eternal
participants in this
eternal
process in your experiences you talked
about the birth of the future human yeah
can you shut a little light on what that
is about yeah yeah there's a chapter in
the book called the birth of the future
human and I really think this is maybe
the most important chapter of the book
and it's it's also the one that caught
me completely by surprise I wasn't
expecting anything like this in my in my
journey I mean I I thought first it was
a personal Journey about personal
healing personal
Awakening then when that expanded I
still thought okay it's a journey about
uh an individual being given experiences
that provide insight into the deep
structure underlying Our Lives but then
about halfway through my work starting
in around 1990 and continuing through
1995 I began to be given a series of
visions that were internally consistent
that were dropped into my sessions
talking about Humanity's evolutionary
Destiny where Humanity was in its
evolutionary Journey that we were coming
into a turning point in history that we
were coming into a a culmination of a
crescendo
of The evolutionary Journey that was
going to catalyze a tra transformation
inside Humanity that would Mark a true
before and after moment in time that and
that there was a profound spiritual
transformation that was coming to a
Christian coming to a head and it this
kept repeating itself in my work in
different
ways but I did not know how the universe
was ever going to pull this off I didn't
understand how it it didn't didn't show
me how it was going to
happen and then about a year and a half
later when I was in the middle of the
diamond Luminosity work so I was working
at a very deep level and one particular
day I experienced I was given an
experience taken far into the future I
had died and disolved into the human
psyche so when I say I was taken into
the future it's not so much that Chris
bash was taken into the future it's like
ask the Human family I experience the
Human family in a trans temporal
dimension of time in in a ex time
expanded State and I experience in an
accelerated way the death and Rebirth of
the entire Human family I experience a
profound geopolitical crisis that seemed
to be being seeded by a cascading series
of of ecological crisis but I
experienced some type of
fundamental loss of control an
unraveling of Life at the basic level a
a tremendous Global crisis that was so
deep and so profound that no one was
going to be able to isolate themselves
or protect themselves from it it was a
crisis so deep it was going to bring
Humanity to our Collective knees
but just when the crisis reached its
peak I experienced that we moved through
it and then there was the beginning of a
lightning we we made it through this
crisis and when we began to pick
ourselves
up in this postcrisis period of History
we've discovered that we had been
profoundly changed something happened in
this crisis that opened us up changed us
at the very center of our our being one
way of talking about it is that there
was a birth of Oneness that Oneness
instead of being a private mystical
experience of a very select few Oneness
was born within the human psyche as a
whole we tapped
into certain a certain depth of our
nature that allowed us to
become first of all it allowed us become
no longer enemies with all other human
beings all the divisions of history that
have been used to justify you know
differences of race differences of class
structure difference of religion all
those differences which we think of and
have used to divide history national
identity all those were dissolved all
those were transcended and we began to
experience a fundamental Oneness at the
core of our life and all life itself and
this led to a uh creativity began to
reinforce itself and we began to create
new social forms new
structures and eventually over time I
came to understand that what this was
about was that there was a a pressure
building up within the collective
psyche and that this pressure was taking
Humanity through a collective death
rebirth process that represented a
fundamental irreversible shift in the
collective psyche I think of it as the
shift in the plate tectonics of the
collective psyche so that any child born
after we make this transition will be
operating within a psychic field which
is fundamentally different more elevated
more spiritually informed than we are
operating out of now or we've been
operating out of the past so that this
isn't simply a crisis with economic
ramifications or industrial
ramifications or political or Civic
ramifications it's a a revolution in the
fundamental structure of the human
psyche it's a it's a revolution in our
human nature now I think that we have
entered this this period this process I
think we're in the very early stages of
it we're just getting started on it I
think the 21st century will be pivotal
in going through this transformative
crisis I wasn't given a lot of details
on names dates and places and stuff like
that what I was given was this core
experience of what it's going to feel
like for the Human family when they go
through a collective Dark Night of the
Soul go through a collective ordeal that
eventually will awaken an underlying
revolution in the human psyche a
spiritual opening of the human psyche
now I'm not alone this is nothing you
know unique to me I mean this is an
Insight that many spiritual teachers
have had many indigenous people have had
many psychedelics have tapped into this
understanding and I think this is the
flow of History underneath us that we
can tap into in different ways I think
many of the spiritual mystical
Traditions have tapped into and have
begin to understand some of this Dynamic
but I think we're coming into a century
where we are at a critical Turning Point
MH I really believe that the 21st
century is pivotal here because if we
just look at the scientist scientific
data of on the ecological crisis if we
look at what is now an
increasingly shared understanding of the
depth of ecological disruption that
we're going into and the change of of
interrupting well I won't go into the
the scientific material but clearly we
cannot continue on Earth operating the
way that we had been operating in the
past we don't have enough resources it's
inequality is just too
extreme I don't think we can continue to
to govern the Earth or out of the
psychological structure of the ego the
ego is fundamentally a divided psychic
structure and I think the ego is a
beautiful thing it's a magnificent thing
but it fundamentally is cut off from the
core of existence the foundation of
existence and each other we need to
evolve into a higher level of
Consciousness which is post
egoic in order to have the wisdom to to
rise to the challenges that the ego has
created for Humanity over its last
thousand multi- thousand year history
and I think we will I think we will come
through this crisis I think we're going
to go through unbelievable suffering in
the centuries ahead but I do believe
that we come through it because that at
least that's been the nature of my
experience we do come through this and
we Humanity does make this evolutionary
pivot well I know there's more you can
share about this topic and I think we'll
do a whole other
conversation about the birth of a future
human and also we want to talk more
about
reincarnation yeah can you share why you
stopped these LSD sessions in
1999 well talk about this in the book in
the last chapter coming off the
mountain and I basically boil it down to
two
reasons pain and heartache my subtle
Energy System and psychedelic States
open you up to huge flows of energy
you're taking in enormous flows of
energy it takes years and years to
manage the flows of energy and I
basically realized that I was running so
hot that even months after my session
was over I was still running I was
permanently uncomfortable in my body
because of the quantity of energy that
that was running in my subtle Energy
System my chi system or my
Prana uh so that was telling me that it
was time to let my body calm down and
let that subtle Energy System find a new
equilibrium
point but the main reason I stopped was
because of
Heartache because once you dissolve into
the
Divine Light once you dissolve into
Diamond luminosity and dissolve into the
crystallin nature of Consciousness at
this very very deep level coming back
into time and space is just difficult
it's very hard it you know you lose your
your zest for living inside time and
space when you know how much more is
available to you outside of time and
space and going into coming out of and
going into and coming out of this was it
just was became too painful and So
eventually uh my beloved and I came to
an agreement that I would not return to
these states of Consciousness until I
could stay with her
forever uh and that's really when that's
really what lies behind my stopping I
just had to stop and for the rest of my
life focus on internalizing
the gifts that I had already been given
rather than trying to acquire or be
given more
gifts you've been in communication with
Stannis LOF gra and Ralph mner who are
pioneers in this area of psychedelics
and psychological Consciousness Cosmic
exploration MH Have you shared your
experiences with them and what have they
shared with you about
that and been in dialogue with both of
them and I have shared my sessions with
Stan and he quotes from some of my
sessions scattered throughout his books
some of them are Anonymous and in some
of the later works they're they're
identified as
mine and Stan very graciously wrote a
beautiful forward to my book dark night
early Dawn which was my first major book
on psychedelic uh work psychedelic
Theory I think that there a
fundamental I mean we have different
projects different agendas I mean Stan
is a a therapist he's a world healer
he's he has worked with thousands of
individuals and collected thousands and
thousands of session experiences and
organized them
into a an understanding of the the vast
scope of the landscape that that one
experiences in these states my work has
been different I'm I'm really been doing
an individual Journey penetrating deeper
and deeper and deeper into the universe
so I see our work as complimentary in
that way but yeah I've been in in
dialogue with both of
them yeah I love them both very dearly
uh Ralph has now transitioned on I love
them dearly uh we've been in dialogue
Ralph gave me feedback on LSD in the
mind of the universe before I published
it so yeah I consider them close
colleagues and good friends so they were
supportive of your process yes yeah
that's wonderful the last area I want to
touch on with you is that of course
people listening some may think well how
much can we trust these experiences and
I know that you had
a conversation or interaction with
Kenneth ring who is the co-founder of
the internet
Association for near death
studies yeah I was wondering if you
could share a little bit about your
correspondence with him or what you have
to say say about the how much we can
trust your
experiences yeah that's a really
important question I mean how do how do
we know that we aren't simply exploring
some hidden corner of my personal
unconscious or even some hidden corner
of the collective psyche I mean I know I
understand how radical the assertions
are that I'm making making them sound
almost Cavalier how do we know that we
can trust these experiences to be what
I'm suggesting that they
are and Ken ring and I had a dialogue
about this Ken is a wonderful
scholar and he's a good friend and so
after he had read LSD in the mind of the
universe he wrote me and we went back
and forth around precisely this issue
how trustable are these psychedelic
experiences how do we know that they're
not better understood as a manifestation
of something coming out of the personal
psyche or the collective psyche that
they really are have these metaphysical
ontological ramifications that I've been
interpret them to have and so he and I
went back and forth in an exchange of
letters about this and Ken worked me
over pretty hard I mean he was asking
hard questions and I loved it and
eventually we decided that this was a
dialogue that was worth sharing so we
wrote it up in an essay called our deep
psychedelic experiences trustable and we
published it online and it's available
if you just Google that title you'll
find
it and I in it I try to address that
specific issue and I also bring
in other people's experiences which
provide levels of objective verification
because many psychedelic
experiences lead us to have experiences
that can be verified because they relate
to something inside time and
space the deeper cosmological
experiences cannot be verified in that
way but the the existence of verifiable
experiences when they refer to time
space reality certainly lends points to
the credibility of the deeper
cosmological experiences so I bring in a
lot of evidence in the footnotes and in
in the literature that speak to the
issue of the
trustability of these experiences I
think most of our doubt about their
trustability is completely
understandable but I think it comes
from first not having personal
experience of these states and trying to
understand them within a metaphysical
framework that's based upon time of
physical sensation experience
you know mental experience sensate
experience we're trying to understand
these things within a a framework which
is smaller than we want they need to be
it's just like you know we had to have
tens of thousands of near episodes in
print and published before the medical
community began to take them seriously
because they didn't want to interpret
these as an indication of the existence
of spiritual reality they wanted to
interpret it as something going on
inside the physical process and I think
that's true for psychedelic experiences
too we need to we need to develop a more
sophisticated ontology metaphysical
understanding even to have a framework
for understanding some of these
experiences and this is why I didn't
rush into print on any of these
experiences I mean it after I stopped my
work in 99 I really spent 20 years
digesting them analyzing looking at
other people's experiences looking at
the other metaphysical systems and and
trying to put all the pieces of the
jigsaw puzzle together before I
published LSD in the mind of the
universe so a lot of thought it's not
simply you know here's my experience you
can trust it because I had it it's not
that at all it's really what we really
want is not just one person's
experiences but we want to have a
critical protocol with which involves
many people's experiences putting all of
our experiences on the table and finding
out which one of the which of these
experiences are idiosyncratic and which
one of them are common ground we haven't
really begun that work yet we're in the
early stages of doing that but this is
psychedelics are not going to go away
we're going to be using them for decades
and hundreds of years to come and this
challenge of collective verification of
the vision that emerge in these states
is just getting started is just moving
forward it sounds like you're suggesting
that we need more research in this area
which can be tricky because of the taboo
and the legalities around it although it
seems that with other studies on
psilocybin and other psychedelics that
maybe that's beginning to shift I think
it is beginning to shift I think what's
happening is psychedelic the the the
Psychedelic Community is demonstrating
with increasing convincing research that
these substances have a tremendous power
to heal and that's what's bringing them
back into public
discussion we're going to find over time
that the same amplifying qualities which
allow them to have a therapeutic
impact contined if we continue to apply
these
methodologies they continue to open up
deeper and deeper levels of
consciousness and when we get deep
enough eventually we begin to harvest
the philosophical and
cosmological significance of these
substances I gave a talk at the aotus
conference at Oxford last fall and I
called it seizing the philosophical and
cosmological significance of
psychedelics we're not there yet but I
think we're going there we will get
there to move in this direction well
Chris I know this is a very large topic
and I just want to ask this last
question and I'm excited we're going to
have another conversation is there
anything you want to share more today
about psychedelics and the cosmic
mind I want to return again to the
cautionary words that we shared in the
very
beginning
uh this is this is deep challenging
demanding work you do not try to climb
Mount Everest unless you have all the
best equipment and all the best guides
going with you you do not want to go
deep into the psyche unless you have all
the best equipment and the best context
for doing this type of work so I I want
to affirm that I want to affirm the
importance of a rigorous
protocol if you want to tr go deep you
have to have a particularly rigorous C
protocol first just to survive the
encounter but also to to take
experiences and distill them into
increasingly clear clear articulate
experiences that are not lost into uh
you know that that your mind just
doesn't swallow them up you can really
bring back the core of the experience
once you do that once you've taken all
the cautions all the precautions and
once
you have spent time doing your due
diligence in this then I think we are at
at the
cusp of a completely new chapter in
philosophy of Consciousness a new
chapter in our
understanding what is happening in
existence why is human existence the way
it is why is existance the way it is
what's going on underneath the surface
what is the nature of the the
intelligence that's manifesting the body
of the universe what is the nature of
the intelligence that's manifesting
inside our own hearts and mind over time
this I think is the beginning of a whole
new chapter of philosophical and
spiritual
reflection in conclusion I I just would
want to leave with your viewers a sense
of of
excitement or uh this tremendous turning
point that we are at this pivot point of
this profound deepening of our
understanding of our experience of these
deep structures of reality and a
deepening of our understanding of what's
taking place behind the scenes and the
opportunity to enter into conscious
communion with the source of our
existence which was previously maybe
just the privileged domain of very very
Advanced meditative and contemplative
Mystics but now we have a new modality
that allows even ordinary human beings
to have just a touch taste of these
experiences which can be
life-changing and for people to know the
risks and the benefits right because you
know each person might have a different
reaction a response to these kinds of
substances yeah there are screening
criteria and more important more
criteria that will be we which are used
in order
to uh make sure people who do this work
are safe and only people who
should do this work do do this work
Chris bash thank you so much for being
with me today thank you so much for
going beyond the Beyond and bringing it
back for all of us I really have enjoyed
our conversation and I look forward to
our next
one thank you Remy I have enjoyed our
conversation too thank you for the work
you're doing we need all the wisdom we
can get in the years ahead yes and for
those of you watching or listening thank
you for being with us because you are
the reason that we are
[Music]
[Applause]
here book three in the new thinking
alloud dialogue series is you UFOs and
UAP are we really alone now available on
Amazon you can now download a free PDF
copy of issue number eight of the new
thinking allowed magazine or order a
beautiful printed copy go to newthinking
aloud.
G for